PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT
Project Risk Management includes the processes of conducting risk management planning, identification,
analysis, response planning, and controlling risk on a project. The objectives of project risk management are to
increase the likelihood and impact of positive events, and decrease the likelihood and impact of negative events
in the project.
Figure 11-1 provides an overview of the Project Risk Management processes, which are as follows:
11.1 Plan Risk Management—The process of defining how to conduct risk management activities for a
project.
11.2 Identify Risks—The process of determining which risks may affect the project and documenting
their characteristics.
11.3 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis—The process of prioritizing risks for further analysis or action
by assessing and combining their probability of occurrence and impact.
11.4 Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis—The process of numerically analyzing the effect of identified
risks on overall project objectives.
11.5 Plan Risk Responses—The process of developing options and actions to enhance opportunities and
to reduce threats to project objectives.
11.6 Control Risks—The process of implementing risk response plans, tracking identified risks, monitoring
residual risks, identifying new risks, and evaluating risk process effectiveness throughout the project.
These processes interact with each other and with processes in other Knowledge Areas as described in detail
in Section 3 and Annex A1.
Project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on one or
more project objectives such as scope, schedule, cost, and quality. A risk may have one or more causes and,
if it occurs, it may have one or more impacts. A cause may be a given or potential requirement, assumption,
constraint, or condition that creates the possibility of negative or positive outcomes. For example, causes could
include the requirement of an environmental permit to do work, or having limited personnel assigned to design the
project. The risk is that the permitting agency may take longer than planned to issue a permit; or, in the case of
an opportunity, additional development personnel may become available who can participate in design, and they
can be assigned to the project. If either of these uncertain events occurs, there may be an impact on the project,
scope, cost, schedule, quality, or performance. Risk conditions may include aspects of the project’s or organization’s
environment that contribute to project risk, such as immature project management practices, lack of integrated
management systems, concurrent multiple projects, or dependency on external participants who are outside the
project’s direct control.
Project risk has its origins in the uncertainty present in all projects. Known risks are those that have been
identified and analyzed, making it possible to plan responses for those risks. Known risks that cannot be managed
proactively, should be assigned a contingency reserve. Unknown risks cannot be managed proactively and therefore
may be assigned a management reserve. A negative project risk that has occurred is considered an issue.
Individual project risks are different from overall project risk. Overall project risk represents the effect of
uncertainty on the project as a whole. It is more than the sum of the individual risks within a project, since it includes
all sources of project uncertainty. It represents the exposure of stakeholders to the implications of variations in
project outcome, both positive and negative.
Organizations perceive risk as the effect of uncertainty on projects and organizational objectives. Organizations
and stakeholders are willing to accept varying degrees of risk depending on their risk attitude. The risk attitudes of
both the organization and the stakeholders may be influenced by a number of factors, which are broadly classified
into three themes:
• Risk appetite, which is the degree of uncertainty an entity is willing to take on in anticipation of a reward.
• Risk tolerance, which is the degree, amount, or volume of risk that an organization or individual will
withstand.
• Risk threshold, which refers to measures along the level of uncertainty or the level of impact at which a
stakeholder may have a specific interest. Below that risk threshold, the organization will accept the risk.
Above that risk threshold, the organization will not tolerate the risk.
For example, an organization’s risk attitude may include its appetite for uncertainty, its threshold for risk levels
that are unacceptable, or its risk tolerance at which point the organization may select a different risk response.
Positive and negative risks are commonly referred to as opportunities and threats. The project may be accepted
if the risks are within tolerances and are in balance with the rewards that may be gained by taking the risks. Positive
risks that offer opportunities within the limits of risk tolerances may be pursued in order to generate enhanced
value. For example, adopting an aggressive resource optimization technique is a risk taken in anticipation of a
reward for using fewer resources.
Individuals and groups adopt attitudes toward risk that influence the way they respond. These risk attitudes are
driven by perception, tolerances, and other biases, which should be made explicit wherever possible. A consistent
approach to risk should be developed for each project, and communication about risk and its handling should
be open and honest. Risk responses reflect an organization’s perceived balance between risk taking and risk
avoidance.
To be successful, an organization should be committed to address risk management proactively and consistently
throughout the project. A conscious choice should be made at all levels of the organization to actively identify and
pursue effective risk management during the life of the project. Project risk could exist at the moment a project
is initiated. Moving forward on a project without a proactive focus on risk management is likely to lead to more
problems arising from unmanaged threats.
11.1 Plan Risk Management
Plan Risk Management is the process of defining how to conduct risk management activities for a project. The
key benefit of this process is it ensures that the degree, type, and visibility of risk management are commensurate
with both the risks and the importance of the project to the organization. The risk management plan is vital to
communicate with and obtain agreement and support from all stakeholders to ensure the risk management process
is supported and performed effectively over the project life cycle. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of
this process are depicted in Figure 11-2. Figure 11-3 depicts the data flow diagram of the process.
Careful and explicit planning enhances the probability of success for other risk management processes. Planning
is also important to provide sufficient resources and time for risk management activities and to establish an agreedupon
basis for evaluating risks. The Plan Risk Management process should begin when a project is conceived and
should be completed early during project planning.
11.1.1 Plan Risk Management: Inputs
11.1.1.1 Project Management Plan
In planning risk management, all approved subsidiary management plans and baselines should be taken into
consideration in order to make the risk management plan consistent with them. The risk management plan is also
a component of the project management plan. The project management plan provides baseline or current state of
risk-affected areas including scope, schedule, and cost.
11.1.1.2 Project Charter
Described in Section 4.1.3.1. The project charter can provide various inputs such as high-level risks, high-level
project descriptions, and high-level requirements.
11.1.1.3 Stakeholder Register
Described in Section 13.1.3.1. The stakeholder register, which contains all details related to the project’s
stakeholders, provides an overview of their roles.
11.1.1.4 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. The enterprise environmental factors that can influence the Plan Risk Management
process include, but are not limited to, risk attitudes, thresholds, and tolerances that describe the degree of risk
that an organization will withstand.
11.1.1.5 Organizational Process Assets
Described in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can influence the Plan Risk Management
process include, but are not limited to:
• Risk categories,
• Common definitions of concepts and terms,
• Risk statement formats,
• Standard templates,
• Roles and responsibilities,
• Authority levels for decision making, and
• Lessons learned.
11.1.2 Plan Risk Management: Tools and Techniques
11.1.2.1 Analytical Techniques
Analytical techniques are used to understand and define the overall risk management context of the project.
Risk management context is a combination of stakeholder risk attitudes and the strategic risk exposure of a given
project based on the overall project context. For example, a stakeholder risk profile analysis may be performed to
grade and qualify the project stakeholder risk appetite and tolerance. Other techniques, such as the use of strategic
risk scoring sheets, are used to provide a high-level assessment of the risk exposure of the project based on the
overall project context. Depending on these assessments, the project team can allocate appropriate resources and
focus on the risk management activities.
11.1.2.2 Expert Judgment
To ensure a comprehensive establishment of the risk management plan, judgment, and expertise should be
considered from groups or individuals with specialized training or knowledge on the subject area, such as:
• Senior management,
• Project stakeholders,
• Project managers who have worked on projects in the same area (directly or through lessons learned),
• Subject matter experts (SMEs) in business or project area,
• Industry groups and consultants, and
• Professional and technical associations.
11.1.2.3 Meetings
Project teams hold planning meetings to develop the risk management plan. Attendees at these meetings may
include the project manager, selected project team members and stakeholders, anyone in the organization with
responsibility to manage the risk planning and execution activities, and others, as needed.
High-level plans for conducting the risk management activities are defined in these meetings. Risk management
cost elements and schedule activities should be developed for inclusion in the project budget and schedule,
respectively. Risk contingency reserve application approaches may be established or reviewed. Risk management
responsibilities should be assigned. General organizational templates for risk categories and definitions of terms
such as levels of risk, probability by type of risk, impact by type of objectives, and the probability and impact matrix
will be tailored to the specific project. If templates for other steps in the process do not exist, they may be generated
in these meetings. The outputs of these activities are summarized in the risk management plan.
11.1.3 Plan Risk Management: Outputs
11.1.3.1 Risk Management Plan
The risk management plan is a component of the project management plan and describes how risk management
activities will be structured and performed. The risk management plan includes the following:
• Methodology. Defines the approaches, tools, and data sources that will be used to perform risk
management on the project.
• R oles and responsibilities. Defines the lead, support, and risk management team members for each
type of activity in the risk management plan, and clarifies their responsibilities.
• Budgeting. Estimates funds needed, based on assigned resources, for inclusion in the cost baseline and
establishes protocols for application of contingency and management reserves.
• Timing. Defines when and how often the risk management processes will be performed throughout the
project life cycle, establishes protocols for application of schedule contingency reserves, and establishes
risk management activities for inclusion in the project schedule.
• Risk categories. Provide a means for grouping potential causes of risk. Several approaches can be
used, for example, a structure based on project objectives by category. A risk breakdown structure (RBS)
helps the project team to look at many sources from which project risk may arise in a risk identification
exercise. Different RBS structures will be appropriate for different types of projects. An organization can
use a previously prepared custom categorization framework, which may take the form of a simple list of
categories or may be structured into an RBS. The RBS is a hierarchical representation of risks according
to their risk categories. An example is shown in Figure 11-4.
• Definitions of risk probability and impact. The quality and credibility of the risk analysis requires that
different levels of risk probability and impact be defined that are specific to the project context. General
definitions of probability levels and impact levels are tailored to the individual project during the Plan
Risk Management process for use in subsequent processes. Table 11-1 is an example of definitions of
negative impacts that could be used in evaluating risk impacts related to four project objectives. (Similar
tables may be established with a positive impact perspective). Table 11-1 illustrates both relative and
numerical (in this case, nonlinear) approaches.
• Probability and impact matrix. A probability and impact matrix is a grid for mapping the probability
of each risk occurrence and its impact on project objectives if that risk occurs. Risks are prioritized
according to their potential implications for having an effect on the project’s objectives. A typical
approach to prioritizing risks is to use a look-up table or a probability and impact matrix. The specific
combinations of probability and impact that lead to a risk being rated as “high,” “moderate,” or “low”
importance are usually set by the organization.
• Revised stakeholders’ tolerances. Stakeholders’ tolerances, as they apply to the specific project, may
be revised in the Plan Risk Management process.
• Reporting formats. Reporting formats define how the outcomes of the risk management process will
be documented, analyzed, and communicated. It describes the content and format of the risk register as
well as any other risk reports required.
• Tracking. Tracking documents how risk activities will be recorded for the benefit of the current project
and how risk management processes will be audited.
