11.3 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is the process of prioritizing risks for further analysis or action by assessing
and combining their probability of occurrence and impact. The key benefit of this process is that it enables project
managers to reduce the level of uncertainty and to focus on high-priority risks. The inputs, tools and techniques,
and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 11-8. Figure 11-9 depicts the data flow diagram of the process.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis assesses the priority of identified risks using their relative probability or
likelihood of occurrence, the corresponding impact on project objectives if the risks occur, as well as other
factors such as the time frame for response and the organization’s risk tolerance associated with the project
constraints of cost, schedule, scope, and quality. Such assessments reflect the risk attitude of the project
team and other stakeholders. Effective assessment therefore requires explicit identification and management
of the risk approaches of key participants in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. Where these risk
approaches introduce bias into the assessment of identified risks, attention should be paid to identifying bias
and correcting for it.
Establishing definitions of the levels of probability and impact can reduce the influence of bias. The time
criticality of risk-related actions may magnify the importance of a risk. An evaluation of the quality of the
available information on project risks also helps to clarify the assessment of the risk’s importance to the project.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is usually a rapid and cost-effective means of establishing priorities for Plan
Risk Responses and lays the foundation for Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, if required. The Perform Qualitative
Risk Analysis process is performed regularly throughout the project life cycle, as defined in the project’s risk
management plan. This process can lead into Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis (Section 11.4) or directly into Plan
Risk Responses (Section 11.5).
11.3.1 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Inputs
11.3.1.1 Risk Management Plan
Described in Section 11.1.3.1. Key elements of the risk management plan used in the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis process include roles and responsibilities for conducting risk management, budgets, schedule activities
for risk management, risk categories, definitions of probability and impact, the probability and impact matrix,
and revised stakeholders’ risk tolerances. These inputs are usually tailored to the project during the Plan Risk
Management process. If they are not available, they may be developed during the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
process.
11.3.1.2 Scope Baseline
Described in Section 5.4.3.1. Projects of a common or recurrent type tend to have more well-understood risks.
Projects using state-of-the-art or first-of-its-kind technology, and highly complex projects, tend to have more
uncertainty. This can be evaluated by examining the scope baseline.
11.3.1.3 Risk Register
Described in Section 11.2.3.1. The risk register contains the information that will be used to assess and prioritize
risks.
11.3.1.4 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. Enterprise environmental factors may provide insight and context to the risk
assessment, such as:
• Industry studies of similar projects by risk specialists, and
• Risk databases that may be available from industry or proprietary sources.
11.3.1.5 Organizational Process Assets
Described in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can influence the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis process include information on prior, similar completed projects.
11.3.2 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Tools and Techniques
11.3.2.1 Risk Probability and Impact Assessment
Risk probability assessment investigates the likelihood that each specific risk will occur. Risk impact
assessment investigates the potential effect on a project objective such as schedule, cost, quality, or performance,
including both negative effects for threats and positive effects for opportunities.
Probability and impact are assessed for each identified risk. Risks can be assessed in interviews or meetings
with participants selected for their familiarity with the risk categories on the agenda. Project team members and
knowledgeable persons external to the project are included.
The level of probability for each risk and its impact on each objective is evaluated during the interview or meeting.
Explanatory detail, including assumptions justifying the levels assigned, are also recorded. Risk probabilities
and impacts are rated according to the definitions given in the risk management plan. Risks with low ratings of
probability and impact will be included within the risk register as part of the watch list for future monitoring.
11.3.2.2 Probability and Impact Matrix
Risks can be prioritized for further quantitative analysis and planning risk responses based on their risk rating.
Ratings are assigned to risks based on their assessed probability and impact. Evaluation of each risk’s importance
and priority for attention is typically conducted using a look-up table or a probability and impact matrix. Such a
matrix specifies combinations of probability and impact that lead to rating the risks as low, moderate, or high
priority. Descriptive terms or numeric values can be used depending on organizational preference.
Each risk is rated on its probability of occurrence and impact on an objective if it does occur. The organization
should determine which combinations of probability and impact result in a classification of high risk, moderate risk,
and low risk. In a black-and-white matrix, these conditions are denoted using different shades of gray. Specifically
in Figure 11-10, the dark gray area (with the largest numbers) represents high risk: the medium gray area (with
the smallest numbers) represents low risk, and the light gray area (with in-between numbers) represents moderate
risk. Usually, these risk-rating rules are specified by the organization in advance of the project and included in
organizational process assets. Risk rating rules can be tailored in the Plan Risk Management process to the specific
project.
As illustrated in Figure 11-10, an organization can rate a risk separately for each objective (e.g., cost, time,
and scope). In addition, it may develop ways to determine one overall rating for each risk. Finally, opportunities
and threats are handled in the same matrix using definitions of the different levels of impact that are appropriate
for each.
The risk score helps guide risk responses. For example, risks that have a negative impact on objectives,
otherwise known as threats if they occur, and that are in the high-risk (dark gray) zone of the matrix, may require
priority action and aggressive response strategies. Threats found in the low-risk (medium gray) zone may not
require proactive management action beyond being placed in the risk register as part of the watch list or adding
a contingency reserve. Similarly for opportunities, those in the high-risk (dark gray) zone, which may be obtained
most easily and offer the greatest benefit, should be targeted first. Opportunities in the low-risk (medium gray) zone
should be monitored.
11.3.2.3 Risk Data Quality Assessment
Risk data quality assessment is a technique to evaluate the degree to which the data about risks is useful
for risk management. It involves examining the degree to which the risk is understood and the accuracy, quality,
reliability, and integrity of the data about the risk.
The use of low-quality risk data may lead to a qualitative risk analysis of little use to the project. If data quality is
unacceptable, it may be necessary to gather better data. Often, the collection of information about risks is difficult,
and consumes more time and resources than originally planned. The values used in the example in Figure 11-10
are representative. The numbers of steps in the scale are usually established when defining the risk attitude of the
organization.
11.3.2.4 Risk Categorization
Risks to the project can be categorized by sources of risk (e.g., using the RBS), the area of the project affected
(e.g., using the WBS), or other useful categories (e.g., project phase) to determine the areas of the project most
exposed to the effects of uncertainty. Risks can also be categorized by common root causes. This technique helps
determine work packages, activities, project phases or even roles in the project, which can lead to the development
of effective risk responses.
11.3.2.5 Risk Urgency Assessment
Risks requiring near-term responses may be considered more urgent to address. Indicators of priority may
include probability of detecting the risk, time to affect a risk response, symptoms and warning signs, and the
risk rating. In some qualitative analyses, the assessment of risk urgency is combined with the risk ranking that is
determined from the probability and impact matrix to give a final risk severity rating.
11.3.2.6 Expert Judgment
Expert judgment is required to assess the probability and impact of each risk to determine its location in
the matrix shown in Figure 11-10. Experts generally are those having experience with similar, recent projects.
Gathering expert judgment is often accomplished with the use of risk facilitation workshops or interviews. The
experts’ bias should be taken into account in this process.
11.3.3 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Outputs
11.3.3.1 Project Documents Updates
Project documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
• Risk register updates. As new information becomes available through the qualitative risk
assessment, the risk register is updated. Updates to the risk register may include assessments
of probability and impacts for each risk, risk ranking or scores, risk urgency information or risk
categorization, and a watch list for low probability risks or risks requiring further analysis.
• Assumptions log updates. As new information becomes available through the qualitative risk
assessment, assumptions could change. The assumptions log needs to be revisited to accommodate
this new information. Assumptions may be incorporated into the project scope statement or in a
separate assumptions log.