11.5 Plan Risk Responses
Plan Risk Responses is the process of developing options and actions to enhance opportunities and to reduce
threats to project objectives. The key benefit of this process is that it addresses the risks by their priority, inserting
resources and activities into the budget, schedule and project management plan as needed. The inputs, tools and
techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 11-18. Figure 11-19 depicts the data flow diagram
of the process.
The Plan Risk Responses process follows the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process (if used). Each risk
response requires an understanding of the mechanism by which it will address the risk. This is the mechanism
used to analyze if the risk response plan is having the desired effect. It includes the identification and assignment
of one person (an owner for risk response) to take responsibility for each agreed-to and funded risk response. Risk
responses should be appropriate for the significance of the risk, cost-effective in meeting the challenge, realistic
within the project context, agreed upon by all parties involved, and owned by a responsible person. Selecting the
optimum risk response from several options is often required.
The Plan Risk Responses process presents commonly used approaches to planning responses to the risks.
Risks include threats and opportunities that can affect project success, and responses are discussed for each.
11.5.1 Plan Risk Responses: Inputs
11.5.1.1 Risk Management Plan
Important components of the risk management plan include roles and responsibilities, risk analysis definitions,
timing for reviews (and for eliminating risks from review), and risk thresholds for low, moderate, and high risks. Risk
thresholds help identify those risks for which specific responses are needed.
11.5.1.2 Risk Register
The risk register refers to identified risks, root causes of risks, lists of potential responses, risk owners, symptoms
and warning signs, the relative rating or priority list of project risks, risks requiring responses in the near term, risks
for additional analysis and response, trends in qualitative analysis results, and a watch list, which is a list of lowpriority
risks within the risk register.
11.5.2 Plan Risk Responses: Tools and Techniques
Several risk response strategies are available. The strategy or mix of strategies most likely to be effective
should be selected for each risk. Risk analysis tools, such as decision tree analysis (Section 11.4.2.2), can be
used to choose the most appropriate responses. Specific actions are developed to implement that strategy,
including primary and backup strategies, as necessary. A fallback plan can be developed for implementation
if the selected strategy turns out not to be fully effective or if an accepted risk occurs. Secondary risks should
also be reviewed. Secondary risks are risks that arise as a direct result of implementing a risk response. A
contingency reserve is often allocated for time or cost. If developed, it may include identification of the conditions
that trigger its use.
11.5.2.1 Strategies for Negative Risks or Threats
Three strategies, which typically deal with threats or risks that may have negative impacts on project objectives
if they occur, are: avoid, transfer, and mitigate. The fourth strategy, accept, can be used for negative risks or threats
as well as positive risks or opportunities. Each of these risk response strategies have varied and unique influence
on the risk condition. These strategies should be chosen to match the risk’s probability and impact on the project’s
overall objectives. Avoidance and mitigation strategies are usually good strategies for critical risks with high impact,
while transference and acceptance are usually good strategies for threats that are less critical and with low overall
impact. The four strategies for dealing with negative risks or threats are further described as follows:
• Avoid. Risk avoidance is a risk response strategy whereby the project team acts to eliminate the threat or
protect the project from its impact. It usually involves changing the project management plan to eliminate
the threat entirely. The project manager may also isolate the project objectives from the risk’s impact or
change the objective that is in jeopardy. Examples of this include extending the schedule, changing the
strategy, or reducing scope. The most radical avoidance strategy is to shut down the project entirely.
Some risks that arise early in the project can be avoided by clarifying requirements, obtaining information,
improving communication, or acquiring expertise.
• Transfer. Risk transference is a risk response strategy whereby the project team shifts the impact of
a threat to a third party, together with ownership of the response. Transferring the risk simply gives
another party responsibility for its management—it does not eliminate it. Transferring does not mean
disowning the risk by transferring it to a later project or another person without his or her knowledge or
agreement. Risk transference nearly always involves payment of a risk premium to the party taking on
the risk. Transferring liability for risk is most effective in dealing with financial risk exposure. Transference
tools can be quite diverse and include, but are not limited to, the use of insurance, performance bonds,
warranties, guarantees, etc. Contracts or agreements may be used to transfer liability for specified risks
to another party. For example, when a buyer has capabilities that the seller does not possess, it may be
prudent to transfer some work and its concurrent risk contractually back to the buyer. In many cases, use
of a cost-plus contract may transfer the cost risk to the buyer, while a fixed-price contract may transfer
risk to the seller.
• Mitigate. Risk mitigation is a risk response strategy whereby the project team acts to reduce the
probability of occurrence or impact of a risk. It implies a reduction in the probability and/or impact of an
adverse risk to be within acceptable threshold limits. Taking early action to reduce the probability and/or
impact of a risk occurring on the project is often more effective than trying to repair the damage after the
risk has occurred. Adopting less complex processes, conducting more tests, or choosing a more stable
supplier are examples of mitigation actions. Mitigation may require prototype development to reduce the
risk of scaling up from a bench-scale model of a process or product. Where it is not possible to reduce
probability, a mitigation response might address the risk impact by targeting linkages that determine the
severity. For example, designing redundancy into a system may reduce the impact from a failure of the
original component.
• Accept. Risk acceptance is a risk response strategy whereby the project team decides to acknowledge
the risk and not take any action unless the risk occurs. This strategy is adopted where it is not possible
or cost-effective to address a specific risk in any other way. This strategy indicates that the project
team has decided not to change the project management plan to deal with a risk, or is unable to identify
any other suitable response strategy. This strategy can be either passive or active. Passive acceptance
requires no action except to document the strategy, leaving the project team to deal with the risks as
they occur, and to periodically review the threat to ensure that it does not change significantly. The
most common active acceptance strategy is to establish a contingency reserve, including amounts of
time, money, or resources to handle the risks.
11.5.2.2 Strategies for Positive Risks or Opportunities
Three of the four responses are suggested to deal with risks with potentially positive impacts on project objectives.
The fourth strategy, accept, can be used for negative risks or threats as well as positive risks or opportunities. These
strategies, described below, are to exploit, share, enhance, and accept.
• Exploit. The exploit strategy may be selected for risks with positive impacts where the organization wishes
to ensure that the opportunity is realized. This strategy seeks to eliminate the uncertainty associated with
a particular upside risk by ensuring the opportunity definitely happens. Examples of directly exploiting
responses include assigning an organization’s most talented resources to the project to reduce the time
to completion or using new technologies or technology upgrades to reduce cost and duration required to
realize project objectives.
• Enhance. The enhance strategy is used to increase the probability and/or the positive impacts of an
opportunity. Identifying and maximizing key drivers of these positive-impact risks may increase the
probability of their occurrence. Examples of enhancing opportunities include adding more resources to
an activity to finish early.
• Share. Sharing a positive risk involves allocating some or all of the ownership of the opportunity to a
third party who is best able to capture the opportunity for the benefit of the project. Examples of sharing
actions include forming risk-sharing partnerships, teams, special-purpose companies, or joint ventures,
which can be established with the express purpose of taking advantage of the opportunity so that all
parties gain from their actions.
• Accept. Accepting an opportunity is being willing to take advantage of the opportunity if it arises, but
not actively pursuing it.
11.5.2.3 Contingent Response Strategies
Some responses are designed for use only if certain events occur. For some risks, it is appropriate for
the project team to make a response plan that will only be executed under certain predefined conditions, if
it is believed that there will be sufficient warning to implement the plan. Events that trigger the contingency
response, such as missing intermediate milestones or gaining higher priority with a supplier, should be defined
and tracked. Risk responses identified using this technique are often called contingency plans or fallback plans
and include identified triggering events that set the plans in effect.
11.5.2.4 Expert Judgment
Expert judgment is input from knowledgeable parties pertaining to the actions to be taken on a specific and
defined risk. Expertise may be provided by any group or person with specialized education, knowledge, skill,
experience, or training in establishing risk responses.
11.5.3 Plan Risk Responses: Outputs
11.5.3.1 Project Management Plan Updates
Elements of the project management plan that may be updated as a result of carrying out this process include,
but are not limited to:
• Schedule management plan. The schedule management plan is updated to reflect changes in process
and practice driven by the risk responses. This may include changes in tolerance or behavior related to
resource loading and leveling, as well as updates to the schedule strategy.
• C ost management plan. The cost management plan is updated to reflect changes in process and
practice driven by the risk responses. This may include changes in tolerance or behavior related to
cost accounting, tracking, and reports, as well as updates to the budget strategy and how contingency
reserves are consumed.
• Quality management plan. The quality management plan is updated to reflect changes in process
and practice driven by the risk responses. This may include changes in tolerance or behavior related to
requirements, quality assurance, or quality control, as well as updates to the requirements documentation.
• Procurement management plan. The procurement management plan may be updated to reflect
changes in strategy, such as alterations in the make-or-buy decision or contract type(s) driven by the risk
responses.
• Human resource management plan. The staffing management plan, part of the human resource
management plan, is updated to reflect changes in project organizational structure and resource
applications driven by the risk responses. This may include changes in tolerance or behavior related to
staff allocation, as well as updates to the resource loading.
• Scope baseline. Because of new, modified or omitted work generated by the risk responses, the scope
baseline may be updated to reflect those changes.
• Schedule baseline. Because of new work (or omitted work) generated by the risk responses, the schedule
baseline may be updated to reflect those changes.
• Cost baseline. Because of new work (or omitted work) generated by the risk responses, the cost baseline
may be updated to reflect those changes.
11.5.3.2 Project Documents Updates
In the Plan Risk Responses process, several project documents are updated as needed. For example, when
appropriate risk responses are chosen and agreed upon, they are included in the risk register. The risk register
should be written to a level of detail that corresponds with the priority ranking and the planned response. Often, the
high and moderate risks are addressed in detail. Risks judged to be of low priority are included in a watch list for
periodic monitoring. Updates to the risk register can include, but are not limited to:
• Risk owners and assigned responsibilities;
• Agreed-upon response strategies;
• Specific actions to implement the chosen response strategy;
• Trigger conditions, symptoms, and warning signs of a risk occurrence;
• Budget and schedule activities required to implement the chosen responses;
• Contingency plans and triggers that call for their execution;
• Fallback plans for use as a reaction to a risk that has occurred and the primary response proves to be
inadequate;
• Residual risks that are expected to remain after planned responses have been taken, as well as those that
have been deliberately accepted;
• Secondary risks that arise as a direct outcome of implementing a risk response; and
• Contingency reserves that are calculated based on the quantitative risk analysis of the project and the
organization’s risk thresholds.
Other project documents updated could include:
• Assumptions log updates. As new information becomes available through the application of risk
responses, assumptions could change. The assumptions log needs to be revisited to accommodate this
new information.
• T echnical documentation updates. As new information becomes available through the application
of risk responses, technical approaches and physical deliverables may change. Any supporting
documentation needs to be revisited to accommodate this new information.
• Change requests. Planning for possible risk responses can often result in recommendations for changes
to the resources, activities, cost estimates, and other items identified during other planning processes.
When such recommendations are identified, change requests are generated and processed through the
Perform Integrated Change Control process.