11.6 Control Risks
Control Risks is the process of implementing risk response plans, tracking identified risks, monitoring residual
risks, identifying new risks, and evaluating risk process effectiveness throughout the project. The key benefit of
this process is that it improves efficiency of the risk approach throughout the project life cycle to continuously
optimize risk responses. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 11-20.
Figure 11-21 depicts the data flow diagram of the process.
Planned risk responses that are included in the risk register are executed during the life cycle of the project, but
the project work should be continuously monitored for new, changing, and outdated risks.
The Control Risks process applies techniques, such as variance and trend analysis, which require the use of
performance information generated during project execution. Other purposes of the Control Risks process are to
determine if:
• Project assumptions are still valid,
• Analysis shows an assessed risk has changed or can be retired,
• Risk management policies and procedures are being followed, and
• Contingency reserves for cost or schedule should be modified in alignment with the current risk
assessment.
Control Risks can involve choosing alternative strategies, executing a contingency or fallback plan, taking
corrective action, and modifying the project management plan. The risk response owner reports periodically to the
project manager on the effectiveness of the plan, any unanticipated effects, and any correction needed to handle
the risk appropriately. Control Risks also includes updating the organizational process assets, including project
lessons learned databases and risk management templates, for the benefit of future projects.
11.6.1 Control Risks: Inputs
11.6.1.1 Project Management Plan
Described in Section 4.2.3.1. The project management plan, which includes the risk management plan, provides
guidance for risk monitoring and controlling.
11.6.1.2 Risk Register
The risk register has key inputs that include identified risks and risk owners, agreed-upon risk responses,
control actions for assessing the effectiveness of response plans, risk responses, specific implementation actions,
symptoms and warning signs of risk, residual and secondary risks, a watch list of low-priority risks, and the time
and cost contingency reserves. The watch list is within the risk register and provides a list of low-priority risks.
11.6.1.3 Work Performance Data
Described in Section 4.3.3.2. Work performance data related to various performance results possibly impacted
by risks includes, but is not limited to:
• Deliverable status,
• Schedule progress, and
• Costs incurred.
11.6.1.4 Work Performance Reports
Described in Section 4.4.3.2. Work performance reports take information from performance measurements
and analyze it to provide project work performance information including variance analysis, earned value data, and
forecasting data. These data points could be impactful in controlling performance related risks.
11.6.2 Control Risks: Tools and Techniques
11.6.2.1 Risk Reassessment
Control Risks often results in identification of new risks, reassessment of current risks, and the closing of risks
that are outdated. Project risk reassessments should be regularly scheduled. The amount and detail of repetition
that are appropriate depends on how the project progresses relative to its objectives.
11.6.2.2 Risk Audits
Risk audits examine and document the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with identified risks and their
root causes, as well as the effectiveness of the risk management process. The project manager is responsible for
ensuring that risk audits are performed at an appropriate frequency, as defined in the project’s risk management
plan. Risk audits may be included during routine project review meetings, or the team may choose to hold separate
risk audit meetings. The format for the audit and its objectives should be clearly defined before the audit is conducted.
11.6.2.3 Variance and Trend Analysis
Many control processes employ variance analysis to compare the planned results to the actual results. For the
purposes of controlling risks, trends in the project’s execution should be reviewed using performance information.
Earned value analysis and other methods of project variance and trend analysis may be used for monitoring overall
project performance. Outcomes from these analyses may forecast potential deviation of the project at completion
from cost and schedule targets. Deviation from the baseline plan may indicate the potential impact of threats or
opportunities.
11.6.2.4 Technical Performance Measurement
Technical performance measurement compares technical accomplishments during project execution to the
schedule of technical achievement. It requires the definition of objective, quantifiable measures of technical
performance, which can be used to compare actual results against targets. Such technical performance measures
may include weight, transaction times, number of delivered defects, storage capacity, etc. Deviation, such as
demonstrating more or less functionality than planned at a milestone, can help to forecast the degree of success
in achieving the project’s scope.
11.6.2.5 Reserve Analysis
Throughout execution of the project, some risks may occur with positive or negative impacts on budget or
schedule contingency reserves. Reserve analysis compares the amount of the contingency reserves remaining to
the amount of risk remaining at any time in the project in order to determine if the remaining reserve is adequate.
11.6.2.6 Meetings
Project risk management should be an agenda item at periodic status meetings. The amount of time required
for that item will vary, depending upon the risks that have been identified, their priority, and difficulty of response.
The more often risk management is practiced, the easier it becomes. Frequent discussions about risk make it more
likely that people will identify risks and opportunities.
11.6.3 Control Risks: Outputs
11.6.3.1 Work Performance Information
Work performance information, as a Control Risks output, provides a mechanism to communicate and support
project decision making.
11.6.3.2 Change Requests
Implementing contingency plans or workarounds sometimes results in a change request. Change requests are
prepared and submitted to the Perform Integrated Change Control process (Section 4.5). Change requests can
include recommended corrective and preventive actions as well.
• R ecommended corrective actions. These are activities that realign the performance of the project
work with the project management plan. They include contingency plans and workarounds. The latter
are responses that were not initially planned, but are required to deal with emerging risks that were
previously unidentified or accepted passively.
• R ecommended preventive actions. These are activities that ensure that future performance of the
project work is aligned with the project management plan.
11.6.3.3 Project Management Plan Updates
If the approved change requests have an effect on the risk management processes, the corresponding component
documents of the project management plan are revised and reissued to reflect the approved changes. The elements
of the project management plan that may be updated are the same as those in the Plan Risk Responses process.
11.6.3.4 Project Documents Updates
Project documents that may be updated as a result of the Control Risk process include, but are not limited to the
risk register. Risk register updates may include:
• O utcomes of risk reassessments, risk audits, and periodic risk reviews. These outcomes may
include identification of new risks, updates to probability, impact, priority, response plans, ownership, and
other elements of the risk register. Outcomes can also include closing risks that are no longer applicable
and releasing their associated reserves.
• Actual outcomes of the project’s risks and of the risk responses. This information can help project
managers to plan for risk throughout their organizations, as well as on future projects.
11.6.3.5 Organizational Process Assets Updates
The risk management processes produce information that may be used for future projects, and should be
captured in the organizational process assets. The organizational process assets that may be updated include, but
are not limited to:
• Templates for the risk management plan, including the probability and impact matrix and risk register,
• Risk breakdown structure, and
• Lessons learned from the project risk management activities.
These documents should be updated as needed and at project closure. Final versions of the risk register and the
risk management plan templates, checklists, and risk breakdown structure are included.